# Interacting with services - AWS CLI, SDK

## Interacting with services

- All services can be called using APIs and you can talk to APIs using:
  - Console (web), SDK's and CLI that make API calls.

## AWS CLI

- Interact with AWS Proprietary services (S3, DynamoDB etc.) over www.
- Can be installed on Linux/Windows/Mac OS
  - Python & pip is bundled in Windows but require separate installation in Mac OS / Linux
  - `aws --version` get the version of CLI, Python, OS, and *botocore*
- Python based using *botocore* / *boto3* (AWS SDK for python)
- Requires access credentials
  1. Can be found at *IAM -> Users -> Security credentials*
  2. Create your **access key** (can download as CSV)
     - ❗ You cannot restore them, they're generated & shown once
     - To revoke it: disable or delete your key.
  3. Run `aws configure` & paste *Access Key Id* and *Secret Access Key* when prompted
     - You can optionally set default region & output format
       - Otherwise the region is `us-east-1` by default
     - You can run `aws configure` to check if they're saved & modify them.
  4. Credentials are saved in `~/.aws` in Mac OS & Linux
     - In `config` file you have region and output settings.
     - In `credentials` file your access key id and secret key are saved
  5. You can run `help` to get more information about command e.g. `aws s3 ls help`
- **AWS CLI on EC2**
  - ❗ Bad & insecure way:
    - Run `aws configure` and save your credentials
    - Your personal credentials are personal and should only be on your personal computer (not on EC2)
    - Risks:
      - If EC2 is compromised -> Your account will also be compromised
      - If EC2 is shared -> other people may perform actions impersonating you
  - 💡 Better way: AWS IAM Roles
    - IAM Roles can be attached to EC2 instances.
      - ❗ One EC2 instance can have one IAM role at a time
        - But same role can be attached to many other EC2 instances
      - 📝 Also, Roles are not directly attached to EC2 instance, but are attached to instance profile. Instance profile is a container, where roles are attached.
    - IAM Roles can come with a policy authorizing exactly what the EC2 instance should be able to do e.g. AdminAccess or List buckets in S3.
    - EC2 instances can use these profiles automatically without any additional configurations
  - 📝If EC2 need access to other aws resources, never put credentials in it, always use IAM roles
  - Flow:
    - Create IAM role for the resource EC2 will access
    - EC2 portal -> Right click on instance -> Settings -> Attach IAM role
- **S3 CLI**
  - `aws s3 ls`: Lists all buckets available
  - `aws s3 ls s3://bucketname`: Lists contents of the bucket
  - `aws s3 cp s3://bucketname/pic.jpg pic.jpg`: Copy a local file, or S3 objects to your computer or from your computer.
  - `aws s3 mb s3://bucketname`: create a new bucket
  - `aws s3 rb s3://bucketname`: delete existing bucket
  - `aws configure --profile <profile-name>`: Allows you to name a profile and work with multiple profiles. Future commands should have `--profile <profile-name>` parameter to use the profile.
  - Use appropriate region to the end of the command in all the above, remember S3 buckets are regional.

## AWS SDK

- Official SDK's are: Java, .NET, Node.js, PHP, Python (named boto3/botocore), Go, Ruby, C++ ...
- AWS CLI uses the Python SDK
- Recommended to use the **default credential provider chain**
- It works seamlessly with:
  - AWS credentials at `~/.aws/credentials`
  - Use only on your computers or on premise
    - Even better to create a user specifically for that one on-premise server
  - Instance Profile Credentials using IAM Roles
  - Use 100% within AWS services e.g. EC2 machines.
  - You can use environment variables (`AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`)
    - ❗ Less recommended
- **Exponential Backoff**
  - E.g. request 1 fails -> wait 2 sec -> request 2 fails -> wait 4 sec -> request 3 fails -> wait 8 sec ...
  - Any API that fails because of too many calls needs to be retried with Exponential Backoff
    - Applies also to rate limited API
  - Retry mechanism included in SDK API calls
  - Ensures you don't overload API

## Penetration testing

- You can carry out security assessments or penetration tests against own AWS infrastructure without prior approval for 8 services: 1.EC2 Instances, NAT Gateways & ELB 2.RDS 3.CloudFront 4.Aurora 5.API Gateways 6.Lambda & Lambda Edge functions 7.Lightsail 8.Elastic Beanstalk.
  - You can request for inclusion of additional services.
- ❗ Prohibited Activities: DDoS, DoS, DNS zone walking, port/protocol/request flooding
