# API Gateway

- AWS API Management platform
- Supports stateful (WebSocket) and stateless (HTTP) APIs.
- Allows you to build completely serverless applications
  - 💡Common architecture: Client *<-- REST API -->* API Gateway *<-- Proxy requests -->* AWS Lambda *<-- CRUD -->* Amazon DynamoDB
- **Some features**
  - Transform and validate requests and responses
  - API versioning (v1, v2...)
  - Different environments (dev, test, prod...)
  - **Monitoring**
    - Using AWS X-Ray to trace messages as they travel through the APIs to backend services.
    - CloudTrail logs.
  - Auto-documentation
    - Swagger / Open API import to quickly define APIs
    - Generate SDK and API specifications
  - Cache API responses
- **Metering** – define plans that meter and restrict third-party developer access to APIs.
  - Define a set of plans, configure throttling, and quota limits on a per API key basis.
  - Automatically meters traffic to your APIs and lets you extract utilization data for each API key.
- You create different **APIs** (containers)
  - Made of ***methods*** and ***resources***.
  - **API endpoint types**
    - **Regional**: Default, deployed to the specified region.
    - **Edge-optimized**: API requests are routed to the nearest CloudFront Point of Presence (POP)
    - **Private**: Exposed through interface VPC endpoints to allow clients to securely access private API resources inside a VPC.
  - **Methods**
    - Has HTTP verb (`ANY`, `DELETE`, `GET`, `HEAD`, `OPTIONS`, `PATCH`, `POST`, `PUT`)
    - Encapsulates frontend by method requests and method responses
      - During execution, you can modify data in each phase called modules:
        - Method request -> Integration Request -> Integration -> Integration Response -> Method response
      - In integration response you can set *Output Passthrough*
        - Passthrough: pass the client-supplied request payload through the integration request to the backend without transformation.
      - You can also use data transformations with  Velocity Template Language (VTL) templating scripts.
    - Allows ***Mock integrations*** without any back-end.
    - **Endpoint**
      - 💡 Public endpoints are always HTTPS!
      - Types:
        - **Regional**
          - For clients in the same region.
          - Reduces connection overhead
        - **Edge optimized**
          - For geographically distributed clients
          - API requests are routed to the nearest CloudFront Point of Presence (POP).
        - **Private**: Can only be accessed from your VPC using an interface VPC endpoint
    - **Integration type**: Lambda, HTTP, MOCK, AWS Service, VPC Link (for internal endpoints)
      - **Proxy** integrations (can be HTTP or lambda) sends & passes entire payload without modifications (passthrough)
        - **Lambda** allows **Lambda proxy integration**: Requests will be proxied with request details available in the `event` of the handler function.
    - Can use default timeout (29 seconds)
  - **Resources**
    - Resources groups **methods** or other nested resources.
    - Each resource has name (e.g. `Houses`), path (e.g. `/resources`) and option to enable CORS.
  - Are deployed to ***Stage***s (e.g. dev / test / prod)
    - You get an URL for stages
    - Stage options:
      - ***Settings***: Cache, Method throttling (with rate & burst), Client certificate
      - ***Logs/Tracing***: Enable CloudWatch logs / metrics, enable custom access logging, enable X-Ray tracing.
      - ***Stage variables*** that are key value pairs like environment variables
      - ***SDK Generation*** to Android, JavaScript, iOS, Java SDK, Ruby etc.
      - ***Export documentation*** as Swagger / OpenAPI 3 with optionally API Gateway or Postman extensions
      - ***Deployment history*** with ability to roll back
      - ***Documentation history*** with ability to roll back
      - ***Canary*** for testing with percentage of API traffic e.g. 95% of users will go to one API version, 5% go to another API version
- **Throttling**
  - **Unlimited scaling**: API Gateway can scale to any level of traffic received by an API
  - Can scale up to the default throttling limit of 10,000 requests per second, and can burst past that up to 5,000 RPS.
    - Throttling is used to protect back-end instances from traffic spikes
  - Throttling can be configured at multiple levels including Global and Service Call.

## Security

- Track and control usage using API keys
  - Can also Lambda authorizers or usage plans to control access to your APIs.
- CORS
  - CORS is used by browsers against cross side scripting (XSS) attacks.
    - E.g. a malicious script in website requests to unknown origins.
  - ❗📝 You must enable CORS for API gateway to send right headers to `OPTIONS` requests.
- **Integrations with other VPC services**
  - Outside of VPC
    - Any AWS Service (AWS Lambda, Endpoints on EC2, Load Balancers)
    - External and publicly accessible HTTP endpoints
  - ❗ Inside of VPC: only AWS Lambda and EC2 endpoints in your VPC.
  
### Authorization and Authentication of backend

- **IAM Roles / Users - AWS Signature Version 4 Signing Process (Sig v4)**
  - Allows you to- You sign all requests with signed using an access key (derivation of access key ID + secret access key) in header
- **IAM policies with Lambda Authorizer** (formerly Custom Authorizers)
  - Uses AWS Lambda to validate the token in header being passed
    - Lambda must return an IAM policy for the user to gateway
    - IAM policy decides whether to gateway can call the back-end
  - Option to cache result of authentication
  - 💡 Helps to use OAuth / SAML / 3rd party type of authentication
- **Cognito User Pools**
  - Cognito fully manages user lifecycle without custom implementation
  - API gateway verifies identity automatically from AWS Cognito
  - ❗ Cognito only helps with authentication, not authorization
  - You can enable MFA for your help users.
  - Flow
    1. Client authenticates & gets token from Cognito User Pools
    2. Client sends request to Gateway with a token
    3. Gateway validates the token
  - 💡 Good for Google & Facebook etc. authentication
- ***IAM vs Custom Authorizer vs Cognito User Pools***

  | Attribute | IAM | Custom authorizer | Cognito User Pool |
  | --------- | --- | ----------------- | ----------------- |
  | **Use case** | Great for users / roles already within your AWS account | Great for third party tokens | You manage your own user pool (can be backed by Facebook, Google, login etc..) |
  | **Authorization** | Handles authentication & authorization | Handles authentication & authorization | Handles only authentication, authorization must be implemented in the back-end |
  | **Implementation** | Leverages Sig v4 | Very flexible in terms of what IAM policy is returned | No need to write any custom code for authentication |
  | **Pricing** | Free (transfer charges) | Pay per Lambda invocation | Free (transfer charges) |
