# Big Data & Data Analytics

## Amazon EMR - Elastic Map Reduce

- Helps creating Hadoop clusters (Big Data) to analyze and process vast amount of data.
- **Map Reduce**
  - Massive Parallel Processing technique
  - Steps
    1. **Map** with user defined mappers: Get data as key value
    2. *Sort* handled by framework
    3. **Reduce** with user defined reducers: Aggregates data
  - **Example**
    - Documents have words, **map** counts animal words, framework sort sorts, and **reduce** sums total occurrences of animal words.
    - Map => `cat:10, dog:3` & `cat:24, dog:5`
    - Reduce => `cat: 34 , dog: 8`
- The clusters can be made of hundreds of EC2 instances.
- EMR takes care of all the provisioning and configuration
- Also supports Apache Spark, HBase, Presto, Flink...
- Auto-scaling and integrated with Spot instances for lower price.
- Nodes
- **Master node**: One node that manages cluster e.g. track status & monitor health
  - ðŸ’¡ You can SSH into master node and from there to task nodes.
- **Core nodes**: Data (HDFS), compute.
  - **Input splits**: Smaller data chunks of input data split by Hadoop
    - Controls control number of Mapper in Map/Reduce
  - **Blocks**: Physical splitting of data
- **Task nodes**: Optional, only compute
  - Usually runs on spot instances
  - Amazon handles if they get executed through running master operations in core nodes.
- How it works:
  1. Upload your data and processing application to S3
  2. Configure and create your cluster by specifying data inputs, outputs, cluster size, security settings, etc.
     - Launch modes:
       - Cluster: Long running
       - Step execution: Do analysis & shut-down cluster
     - Instance size & number of instances
     - Select EC2 key pair & IAM roles to EC2 instances
  3. Monitor the health and progress of your cluster. Retrieve the output in S3
- ðŸ’¡ **Use cases**: data processing, machine learning, web indexing, big data

## Query Engines

- Comparison

  | Attribute | S3 / Glacier Select | Athena | Redshift Spectrum |
  | --------- | --------- | ------ | ----------------- |
  | Functionality | SQL `SELECT` on S3 objects | Query & extract data from S3 (ETL) | SQL queries on S3 using your Redshift cluster |
  | S3 Glacier Support | âœ“ | âœ– | âœ“ |
  | Read compressed files | | âœ“ | âœ“ |
  | Integrations | S3, Glacier | **AWS Glue**, QuickSight, VPC Flow logs, ELB logs, CloudFront & CloudTrail logs | S3, Redshift cluster |
  | Infrastructure | Serverless | Serverless | Serverless |
  | Pricing | Per query: Data Scanned + Data Returned + S3 *(data transfer + requests)* | Per query: Data Scanned + *(data transfer + requests)* | Data scanned + S3 transfer & request + Redshift cluster |
  | When to use | Simple `SELECT` | ETL, Logs, Complex queries (ANSI SQL Compliant e.g. *group by, having, window and geo functions*)  | When using Redshift cluster |
- **Athena vs Spectrum**
  - Athena for ad hoc data discovery and SQL querying
  - Redshift Spectrum for
    - More complex queries and scenarios
    - A large number of data lake users want to run concurrent BI and reporting workloads

## AWS Glue

- Fully managed ðŸ“ETL (Extract, Transform & Load) service
  - Automates time consuming steps of data preparation for analytics.
  - E.g. sorting the data by client timestamp, compressing and storing in a read optimized format.
- Serverless, pay as you go, fully managed, provisions Apache Spark
- Crawls data sources and identifies data formats (schema inference)
- Discover, categorize, save in a catalog from connected sources
  - Sources: Amazon Aurora, RDS, Redshift & S3
- Automated Code Generation
  - It's a customizable Apache Spark code
- Sinks: S3, Redshift, etc..
- **Glue Data Catalog**
  - Metadata (definition & schema) of the Source Tables
  - Can be used by EMR
  - **Crawlers**: Programs that run through data to infer schemas and partitions from e.g. S3, Redshift, RDS.
- E.g. scenario =>
  - Kinesis (ingest & process) -> S3 (through Kinesis Data Firehose) -> Spark job on AWS glue (sort, optimize, crawl and catalog) -> Batch process catalog using Amazon MR (Elastic Map Reduce), query with Athena.

## AWS Data Pipeline

- Move data between different AWS compute and storage services, as well as on-premises data sources, at specified intervals.
- Output to Amazon S3, Amazon RDS, Amazon DynamoDB, and Amazon EMR.
- A pipeline consists of
  - Data nodes for source or destination storages (s3, mysql, dynamodb...)
  - E.g. import, copy, export.
- Differences from ETL
  - ETL pipelines are a subset of data pipelines.
  - ETL may modify data, data pipeline won't.
  - ETLs end in warehouses, built for warehousing.

## AWS Batch

- Managed HPC (high performance computing)
- Batch plans, schedules, and executes your batch computing workloads using Amazon EC2 and Spot Instances.
