# Monitoring

- CloudWatch is for monitoring/performance.
- CloudTrail is for auditing API call stacks e.g. when/where/by whom.

## CloudWatch

- Can monitor Compute (EC2, ASG, ELB, Route53 health checks..), Storage & Content Delivery (EBS, Storage)...
- **Metrics**
  - Provides metrics (e.g. CPU utilization, Network Utilization, Disk Reads/Writes, Status Check) for every services in AWS.
  - Metrics belong to ***namespaces***
  - ***Dimension*** is an attribute of an metric (instance id, environment, etc..)
  - Up to 10 dimensions per metric
  - ❗ 14 days retention, **Extended retention** offering allows up to 15 months.
  - Metrics have ***timestamps***
  - ***EC2 Detailed Monitoring***
    - 📝EC2 instance metrics have basic metrics for "every 5 minutes"
      - With detailed monitoring (for a cost), you get data "every 1 minute"
    - 💡 Use detailed monitoring if you want to more prompt scale your ASG
    - AWS Free Tier allows up to 10 detailed monitoring metrics
    - ❗ EC2 memory usage is by default not pushed
      - 💡 Must be pushed from inside the instance as a custom metric with e.g. CloudWatch agent.
  - ***Custom Metrics***
    - Possibility to define and send your own custom metrics to CloudWatch
      - E.g. for RAM utilization, disk storage usage.
    - Must be pushed from inside the instance as a custom metric by installing agent
      - E.g. CloudWatch agent
    - Ability to use dimensions (attributes) to segment metrics
      - E.g. `Instance.id`, `Environment.name`
    - Metric resolution
      - Standard: 1 minute
      - High resolution: up to 1 second (`StorageResolution` API parameter)
        - Higher cost
    - API call `PutMetricData`
    - 💡 Use exponential back off in case of throttle errors
  - ❗ CloudWatch itself does not have a native export feature that will send data periodically to S3.
- **Dashboards**
  - Can create CloudWatch dashboard of metrics
  - In console you can monitor & access dashboards
  - Can be ***regional*** or ***global*** (e.g. include graphs from different regions)
  - You can change the time zone & time range of the dashboards
  - You can setup automatic refresh (10s, 1m, 2m, 5m, 15m)
  - Pricing
    - 3 dashboards (up to 50 metrics) for free
    - 3$ per dashboard per month afterwards
  - Types are:
    - *Line*: compare metrics over time
    - *Stacked area*: Compare the total over time
    - *Number*: instantly see the latest value for a metric
    - *Text*: Free text with markdown formatting
    - *Query results*: Explore results from Logs Insights
- **Logs**
  - Applications can send logs to CloudWatch using the SDK
  - CloudWatch Logs **metric filters** can evaluate CloudTrail logs for specific terms, phrases or values.
    - I.e. values are not always from CloudWatch Metrics, but can be generated from Logs e.g. HTTP errors.
  - CloudWatch can collect log from *Elastic Beanstalk*, *ECS*, *AWS Lambda*, *VPC Flow Logs*, *API Gateway*, *CloudTrail*, *CloudWatch log agents*, *Route53* and more.
    - CloudWatch Log Agents
      - Install on EC2 machines `sudo yum install -y awslogs`
        - Ensure EC2 has IAM permissions to write to CloudWatch
      - Configure `/etc/awslogs/awslogs.conf` for logs (errors etc.)
      - Configure `/etc/awslogs/awscli.conf` for region
      - Start service with `systemctl start awslogsd`
  - CloudWatch logs can go to:
    - Batch exporter to S3 for archival
    - Stream to ElasticSearch cluster for further analytics
    - Stream to Lambda
  - You need to store logs in 2 things:
    - ***Log groups***: arbitrary name, usually representing an application
    - ***Log stream***: instances within application / log files / containers
  - Can define ***log expiration policies*** (never expire, 30 days, etc..)
    - You pay for data retention in CloudWatch
  - Using the AWS CLI we can tail CloudWatch logs
    - To see e.g. how application is behaving in real time
  - **Security**
    - ❗ To send logs to CloudWatch, make sure IAM permissions are correct!
    - Encryption of logs using KMS at the Group Level
  - CloudWatch Logs can use ***filter expressions***
    - E.g. find a specific IP inside of a log
    - ***Metric filter***s can be used to trigger alarms
      - E.g. if specific IP appears you can trigger an alarm
  - ***CloudWatch Logs Insights***
    - Log analytics service for CloudWatch
    - Can be used to query logs and add queries into CloudWatch Dashboards
    - Pay for the queries you run
- **Alarms**
  - Alarms are used to trigger notifications for any metrics
  - You can set up ***billing alarms*** to be triggered after the account charges goes over a certain threshold.
  - Alarms invokes **action**s such as:
    - **EC2 Actions**: e.g. restart EC2.
    - **SNS Notifications**: email, SMS, etc.
    - **Auto Scaling**: triggers Auto Scaling policies.
  - Various options (sampling, %, max, min, etc...)
  - Alarm states: `OK`, `INSUFFICIENT_DATA`, `ALARM` (being triggered)
  - Period:
    - Length of time in seconds to evaluate the metric
    - 📝 High resolution custom metrics
      - Decreases as metrics age: 1 sec (for 3 hours), then 1 minute (for 15 days), 5 minute (for 63 days), 1 hour for 15 months.
    - E.g. `NetworkOut < 2.000.000` for 1 data points (EC2) within 5 minutes
  - Data points
    - Represents the values of that variable over time
    - E.g. if period is 5 minutes and data points is three then the alarm will trigger after 15 minutes of being condition met
- **Events**
  - **Event Rule**
    - Types
      - ***Schedule***: Notifications that'll be triggered on demand
      - ***Event Pattern***: React to service doing something e.g. CodePipeline state changes.
    - Targets: e.g. lambda function, EC2 `StopInstances` API call, SNS, SQS, ECS Task, Event bus in another AWS account...
  - Triggers to Lambda functions, SQS/SNS/Kinesis Messages
  - CloudWatch Event creates a small JSON document to give information about the change

## CloudTrail

- Tracks API events allowing you to see who accessed what resources and when.
- CloudTrail reports on who made the change, when, and from which location.
- Per AWS account & per region
  - 💡 Should be enabled in all regions with a cloud formation stack.
  - All accounts / regions can log into same S3 bucket in an account / region.
  - In a region when you apply the trail to all regions, CloudTrail creates a new trail in all other regions.
- Enabled by default
  - Default metrics are from hypervisor (e.g. CPU, connections)
  - Many services has deeper "Advanced monitoring" for inside hypervisor metrics such as connected users, CPU usage per thread / application.
- **Encryption**
  - A single KMS key can be used to encrypt log files for trails applied to all regions.
  - CloudTrail log files are by default encrypted using S3 Server Side Encryption (SSE)
  - You can also enable encryption SSE KMS for additional security
- Get an history of events / API calls made within your AWS Account by Console, SDK, CLI, AWS Services
- Can push to S3 (encrypted by default), CloudWatch Logs and SNS.
- Has 90 days of retention
- 📝 If a resource is deleted in AWS, look into CloudTrail first!

## AWS Config

- Asses, audit, and evaluate the configurations of your AWS resources.
  - Resources include RDS, subnets, DB snapshots, security groups, and event subscriptions.
- Reports on what has changed
  - You can e.g. look back and see what instances were in default VPC last week.
- Per AWS account & per region
  - 💡 Should be enabled in all regions with a cloud formation stack.
  - Data aggregation in AWS Config allows you to aggregate AWS Config data from multiple accounts and regions into a single account.
- Tracks resource state.
- AWS Config is around compliance, Trusted Advisor is more around recommendations but they check same things for security.
- Integrates with SNS to receive notifications.
