# EC2 - Elastic Compute Cloud

- Some capabilities/integrations:
  - **EC2**: Renting virtual machines
  - **EBS**: Storing data on virtual drives
  - **ELB**: Distributing load across machines
  - **ASG** Scaling the services using an auto-scaling group
- **Pricing**
  - Billed only when in `running` state.
    - And `stopping` state only if it's hibernating.
    - Also `stopped` state for reserved instance.
  - Billed by the hour or the second, depending on which AMI you're running
  - `t2.micro` is free tier.
  - **Data transfer costs**
    - Free between EC2 and other services.
    - Free between EC2 instances in same availability zone using private IP addresses only.
    - $0.01/GB for transfer between instances in different availability zones
    - See also [data transfer costs](./1.%20Introduction.md#data-transfer-charges)
- **Elastic Network Interface (ENI)**
  - Each EC2 has one default ENI.
  - Each ENI have
    - one primary private IPv4, can have additional private IPv4 (optional)
    - one **Elastic IP** (static IP) per private IPv4 (optional)
    - one public IPv4
    - one or more IPv6
    - one or more security group
    - a mac address
    - source destination check flag
    - description of ENI
  - Can attach a secondary network interface
  - You can attach a network interface to an EC2 instance in the following ways:
    - **Hot attach**: When it's running
    - **Warm attach**: When it's stopped
    - **Cold attach**: When the instance is being launched
  - Termination with instance termination
    - Default interfaces are terminated with instance termination.
    - Manually added interfaces are not terminated by default
- Type describes how powerful the machine is (vCPUs, Memory, Network performance etc.)
- **EC2 Tenancy** allows you to choose a tenant for the instance
  - ***Run a shared hardware*** - Default
  - ***Dedicated*** - Run a Dedicated instance, shared within different instance (non-dedicated) from same AWS account.
  - ***Dedicated host*** - You have visibility and control over how instances are placed on the server
- **Status Checks** checks physical machine (underlying hyper-visor) and returns pass & fail.
  - You can set-up **Status Checks** alarms.
  - Auto Scaling Group uses this check by default.
    - Can set to use Elastic Load Balancer's health check.
- You can enable ***termination protection*** *(termination = deletion)*
  - Prevents an instance from being accidentally terminated by requiring that you disable the protection before terminating the instance
- **EC2 Instance Metadata**
  - Allows AWS EC2 instances to learn about themselves without using an IAM Role / permission.
  - The internal URLs are accessible only by EC2
  - You can retrieve the IAM Role name from the metadata
    - ❗ You can not retrieve the IAM policy
  - ***Meta data*** = Info about the EC2 instance at `http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data`
    - Your EC2 instance has always credentials to the role that usually expires in 1 hour
      - Get IAM credentials: `http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/iam/security-credentials/<iam-role-name>`
  - ***User data*** = launch script of the EC2 instance `http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data`
- **Enhanced Networking** can be enabled on specific instances with a driver to reduce networking overhead + faster networking.
  - 📝Single root I/O virtualization (SR-IOV)
  - Utilizes Elastic Network Adapter (high Performance Network Interface for Amazon EC2)
  - Free
  - ❗ Limitations
    - Instances must be launched in a VPC
    - Instances must be launched from a HVM AMI
  - **Elastic Network Adapter**: High performance
  - **Elastic Fabric Adapter**: High Performance Computing
    - ❗ Linux machines only
- **Monitoring**
  - ❗📝 CloudWatch does not monitor memory usage as well as disk space utilization
    - 💡 Requires installation of CloudWatch agent or use custom scripts to send custom metrics.
- **Launch templates**
  - Store launch parameters so that you don't specify them every time you launch an instance.
  - E.g. AMI ID, instance type, key pairs and Security Groups.t
- 💡 An instance may immediately terminate if:
  - You've reached your EBS volume limit
  - An EBS snapshot is corrupt
  - The root EBS volume is encrypted and you do not have permissions to access the KMS key for decryption
  - The instance store-backed AMI that is attached is missing a required part (an image.part.xx file)

## Basic tasks

- **Hibernating** an instance means persisting all of its data and RAM so you can pre-warm an instance before resuming.
- **Stopping and starting** an instance migrate EC2 to a most likely new underlying host.
- **Retiring**: An instance is scheduled to be **retired** when AWS detects irreparable failure of the underlying hardware hosting the instance.
  - When an instance reaches its scheduled retirement date
    - It is stopped (if it has EBS root volume) or
    - Terminated (if it has instance instance store root volume) by AWS
- **📝Get meta data**
  - Request to EC2 metadata service from your EC2 instance
    - `http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data`
    - It returns the properties (recursively)
    - Get data further e.g. `http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/placement/availability-zone`
  - You can also use `Instance Metadata Query Tool` which is a simple bash script that does the curl.
- **Launch virtual server using AWS Console**
  1. Go to EC2 -> Launch an instance -> Choose Amazon Machine Image (AMI)
  2. Choose type for machine (e.g. `t2.nano`, `t2.micro`)
  3. Configurations
     - Storage: EBS is where the data will be stored (SSD, HDD etc.)
     - You can have different tags
       - *Name* is important as it appears in UI.
  4. Launch
     - For SSH you need to have key pair, you can generate new or use existing.
- **Connect to EC2 through SSH**
  - SSH with e.g. `ssh -i privatekey.pem <user-name>@<ip-address>`
    - Username can be `ec2-user` (Amazon Linux, RHEL, SUSE, FreeBSD), `ubuntu` (Ubuntu, NanoStack), `admin` (Debian), `root` (RHEL, TurnKey, OmniOS), `fedora` (Fedora), `centos` (Centos), ``bitnami` (BitNami)
    - IP address is the public IP address of the machine, you cannot use private IP to connect.
    - Private key `privatekey.pem` is enough as AWS puts public key automatically to `~/.ssh/authorized_keys`
  - 💡 When you first download key-pair file permission is 0644 which is to open -> private key can leak as it's accessible by others.
    - 📝Fix with `chmod 0400 awsEc2.pem` -> only root user can see it.
    - 📝chmod 400 is for Linux only
  - On Linux / Mac we use SSH, on Windows we use PuTTy (on Windows 10 SSH can be used as well)
- **Configuring Windows machines**
  - **EC2 Launch** is PowerShell scripts that makes the computer AWS-friendly
    - It sends instance information to EC2 console, sets computer name & wallpaper, adds DNS suffixes, executes user data, persistence static routes to reach the metadata & KMS services, dynamically extends OS partition to include any unpartitioned space and more...

## Security Groups

- Firewall on EC2 instances.
- Associated to ENI and not with instance
- Controls authorized IP ranges (IPv4 and IPv6) and ports with:
  - **Inbound rules**
    - From other to the instance
    - All inbound rules are denied by default
    - You define protocol (e.g. TCP) & port range & source
      - **Source**
        - 📝Refer another security group (type in Security Group ID)
        - An IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR block
        - A single IPv4 or IPv6 address (e.g. anywhere: `0.0.0.0/0` for IPv4 and `::/0` for IPv6)
  - **Outbound rules**
    - From the instance to other
    - Open to everywhere by default
    - You define protocol (e.g. TCP) & port range & destination.
      - **Destination**
        - 📝Another security group
        - An IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR block
        - A single IPv4 or IPv6 address
        - An AWS service (i.e. prefix list ID)
- Can be attached to multiple instances
- 📝Security groups are sateful(once allowed inbound, connection passes through outbound and vice versa)
- An instance can have multiple security groups
- Locked down to a region / VPC combination
  - ❗ You need to recreate security groups if you change region / VPC.
  - You can create a snapshot => Create AMI and use AMI to launch in other AZ or copy AMI to new region and launch there.
- 💡 Good practice: maintain one separate security group for SSH access.
- 📝Any ***timeout errors*** means a misconfiguration of your security groups
- If your application gives "connection refused" error, then it's an application error or it's not launched
- Being able to reference security groups allows:
  - Easier maintenance as you don't need to work with IP's.
  - E.g. allow EC2 instances to connect with each other by authorizing their attached security groups.
- ❗ You can only delete security group after you delete all EC2 instances associated with the security group.
- ❗📝 You cannot block single IP/IP-range with Security Groups, you'll need NACL (Network Access Control Lists) for it.
  - Security groups can only "allow" services through a default deny
  
## EC2 User Data

- Enables to bootstrap instances using EC2 data script.
  - *bootstrapping* means launching commands when a machine starts
- Script is only run once at the instance first start
- Enables automating boot tasks such as *installing updates*, *installing software*, *downloading common files from internet* ....
- Runs with the root user (`sudo` rights)
- 📝Get user data -> Request to `http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data` from your EC2 instance
- **Flow**
  - Create EC2 -> Configure Instance -> Advanced Details -> User data -> Paste commands
  - 💡 In first line add `#!/bin/bash` -> tells Unix what program to use to run it
- For faster deployment without bootstrapping use **Golden AMI**s:
  1. Create a golden AMI with the static installation components already setup
  2. Use EC2 user data to customize the dynamic installation parts at boot time.
     - 🤗 Elastic Beanstalk is a good example for mixing golden AMIs and EC2 user data.

## EC2 Instance Launch Types

- **On demand instances**
  - Start whenever you want & stop without any long time commitment.
  - Pricing
    - Pay for what you use (billing per second, after the first minute)
    - Has highest cost but no upfront payment
  - 💡 Recommended for short-term and uninterrupted workload, where you can't predict how the application will behave.
    - E.g. when doing auto-scaling
- **Reserved instances**
  - **Standard Reserved instances**
    - Reserve an instance for 1 to 3 years
    - Enables you to modify Availability Zone, scope, network platform, and instance size (within the same instance type)
      - Up to 75% discount compared to On-demand
      - Payment options are "no upfront" (pay monthly), "partial upfront", "all upfront" (cheaper).
    - You can sell sell your unused instances on the AWS Reserved Instance Marketplace.
    - 💡 Recommended when e.g. when running a database over a year
    - 💡 Reserve minimum capacity you'll use in year e.g. 1 EC2 instance in each AZ in multi-AZ architecture.
    - 💡 Can be sold in Reserved Instance Marketplace
  - **Convertible Reserved Instances**
    - Convertible means you have option to change:
      - Instance family, instance type, platform, scope, and tenancy
      - Only if the creation of new instance is equal or greater value
    - Pricing: Up to 54% discount
    - 💡 Workloads are likely to change
  - ***Scheduled Reserved Instances***
    - Launch within time window you reserve
    - 💡 You know something will happen e.g. every week but only during one hour or one day.
- **Spot instances**
  - Cheapest (up to 90% discount compared to on demand) but risk of losing instance
    - Spot instance is charged per second.
    - If AWS shuts down your instance in first hour you don't pay, but you have to pay if you terminate.
  - You bid a maximum price and get the instance as long as it's under the price
    - You lose the instance if you get outbid
      - Instances are reclaimed with a 2 minute notification warning when the spot price goes above your bid.
      - ***Persistence request*** allows instances to come back when the price drops to the right pricing.
    - Price varies based on offer and demand at times
  - **📝Spot instance shut down priority**: The one who had longer time (e.g. 50 min) will be shut down faster than the shorter time (e.g. 5 min)
  - 💡 For short & fault tolerant workloads e.g. batch jobs, Big Data analysis.
  - In the event of an interruption, you can set instances to be **terminated** or **hibernated**.
  - You may get insufficient capacity error
    - Stop all instances & start again to end up in a new hardware.
- ❗ 20 On-Demand & 20 Reserved & 20 Spot instances per region (soft limit)
- **Spot Block**
  - Allows you to request Spot instances for 1 to 6 hours at a time to avoid being interrupted while your job completes

### Tenancy

- Each instance that you launch into a VPC has a tenancy attribute
  - **Default**: Your instance runs on shared hardware.
  - **Dedicated**: Your instance runs on single-tenant hardware.
  - **Host**: Your instance runs on a Dedicated Host, which is an isolated server with configurations that you can control.
- ❗ [Cannot change tenancy](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/dedicated-instance.html#dedicated-howitworks) after launching instances when
  - From *default* to *dedicated* or *host*.
  - From *dedicated* or *host* to *default*.
  - 💡 You only switch between dedicated instances i.e. from *host* to *dedicated* and from *host* to *dedicated*.
  - A VPC tenancy can be changed to any but it only affects new instances.
- **Dedicated instances**
  - Instances running on hardware that's dedicated to you
    - You don't control your hardware.
    - May share hardware with other instances in same account
  - No control over instance placement (can move hardware after Stop / Start)
- **Dedicated Hosts**
  - Physical dedicated EC2 server for your use
  - Full control of EC2 instance placement
  - Visibility into the underlying sockets / physical cores of the hardware
    - You have direct access to the CPU
  - Allocated for your account for a 3 year period reservation
  - More expensive
  - You can allow instance auto-placement where untargeted EC2s will be launched in dedicated host(s).
  - Useful for
    - Complicated licenses such as BYOL - Bring Your Own License, or you pay based on CPU cores etc.
      - ❗ A Dedicated Host is required if you'd like to use your existing Windows Server licenses.
    - Regulatory & compliance needs.
  - ***Dedicated Instances vs Dedicated hosts***

    | Characteristics | Dedicated Instances | Dedicated Hosts |
    | --------------- | ------------------- | --------------- |
    | Enables the use of dedicated physical servers | X | X |
    | Per instance billing (subject to a $2 per region fee) | X | |
    | Per host billing | | X |
    | Visibility of sockets, cores, host ID | | X |
    | Affinity between a host and instance | | X |
    | Targeted & automatic instance placement | | X |
    | Add capacity using an allocation request | | X |

## EC2 Instance Types

- 📝**Main types**

  | Type | Mnemonic | Category | Description | Use-cases |
  | ---- | -------- | -------- | ----------- | --------- |
  | M | (M)ain / (M)edium | General purpose | Balance of compute, memory, network resources | General, mid-size databases, web apps |
  | C | (C)ompute |  Compute optimized | Advanced CPUs | Modeling, analytics, databases |
  | H | (H)DD | Storage optimized | Local HDD storage | Map reduce |
  | R | (R)am | Memory Optimized | More ram per $ | In-memory caching |
  | X | (X)treme | Memory Optimized | Terabytes of RAM and SSD | In-memory databases |
  | I | (I)ops | IO optimized | Local SSD storage, High IOPS | NoSQL databases |
  | G | (G)PU | GPU Graphics | GPUs with video encoders | 3D rendering |
  | P | (P)ictures | GPU Compute | GPUs with tensor cores | Machine learning |
  | F | (F)ield | Accelerated Computing | Field Programmable Gate Array, custom hardware accelerations | Genomics, financial analytics |
  | T | (T)iny / (T)urbo | Burstable, Shared CPUs, lowest cost | Web servers |

  - Remember all: PHD McGift Rx
- Numbers change over time and indicate generation e.g. `t2.`, `t3.`.
- **Burstable instances**
  - Good performance for a burst / short while e.g. spike and your CPU goes to 100%
  - Burst credits
    - Bursting consumes burst credits and low CPU gets you credits.
    - You get more credits when your CPU is low.
- T2 / T3 unlimited provides *unlimited burst* but you pay extra if you go over your credit balance.
- You can also have *Bare Metal* instances to eliminate virtualization overhead.
- X1e is part of Memory Optimized  instance family and recommended for databases.

## EC2 AMIs

- AMI = Amazon Machine Images
- AWS has base images for Ubuntu, Fedora, Red Hat, Windows, Amazon Linux etc.
- AMI can be found and published on the Amazon Marketplace
- **Two virtualization types**
  - **HVM VM** - Hardware virtual machine
    - Utilizes special hardware extensions as it's on bare metal hardware.
    - Enhanced Networking
    - Only option for Windows.
  - **PV VM** - Paravirtual virtual machines, only available for Linux
  - 💡 HVM is recommended because same or better performance than paravirtual guests.
    - ***Before***: Better storage & network in PV VM because of special I/O drivers.
    - ***Now***: PV drivers are available for HVM VM (instead of emulating hardware)
- **Custom AMIs**
  - AMIs can be built for Linux/Windows machines.
  - Removes need for EC2 user data with faster boot time.
  - Can be created from volumes or snapshots.
  - Can use pre-configured & maintained public AMIs from other people by paying by hour.
  - ❗ AMI are built for a specific AWS region
    - An AMI created for a region can only be seen in that region.
    - 📝 Copying makes it available in different regions for e.g. disaster recovery.
  - ❗ Do not use AMI you don't trust, they may be unsecure or contain malware.
  - **VM Import/Export** allows you to import OVA file (or VMDK, VHD, or RAW) as AMI then create EC2 based on it.
    - **AWS SMS - Server Migration Service**
      - Enhances VM import & export
      - Migrate thousands (concurrently 50) of Hyper-V and VMware workloads to AWS.
- **AMI Storage**
  - S3 but you won't see them in the S3 console
  - By default, your AMIs are private and locked for your account / region.
    - You can make AMIs public in order to share with other accounts or sell in AMI Marketplace.
- **AMI Pricing**: Cheap as you only pay for space it takes in S3.

### Common tasks

- **Copying an AMI**
- AWS does not batch copy following, need manual work:
  - User-defined tags
  - Launch permissions
  - S3 bucket permissions
- **Create AMI from EC2**
  - Right click on EC2 -> Image -> Create Image
  - When it's done it appears on EC2 dashboard -> Images -> AMIs
  - You can right click and
    - *Copy* it to another region
    - *Deregister* it in order to remove it.
    - In *image permissions*:
      - Make it publicly available, or share it with other AWS account numbers.
      - Create volume permissions option allows others accessing AMI to make a copy of the AMI.
    - *Launch* a new EC2 based on it.
- 📝**Cross account / cross region AMI Copy**
  - Share AMI with another AWS account
    - Sharing an AMI does not affect the ownership of the AMI.
      - ❗ However if you copy an AMI that has been shared with your account, you are the owner of the target AMI in your account.
    - Flow:
      1. Right click on EC2 -> Image Permissions
      2. Keep it private & add account number.
      3. Select *Add "create volume permissions to snapshot* to allow other accounts to make a copy.
  - Ensure you have read permissions for AMI storage:
    - Associated EBS snapshot (for an Amazon EBS-backed AMI)
    - Associated S3 bucket (for an instance store-backed AMI)
  - ❗ You can't copy:
    - Encrypted AMI shared from another account
      - 💡 Instead you can copy the snapshot (if it's shared with encryption key) and re-encrypt it & register as a new AMI you own.
    - AMI with an associated **billingProduct** shared from another account
      - They're Windows AMIs and AMIs from the AWS marketplace
      - 💡 You can launch an EC2 instance in your account using the shared AMI -> Create an AMI from the instance

## EC2 Placement Groups

- Use to control how EC2 instances will be placed within AWS infrastructure.
- ❗ Works only for certain types of instances
- ❗ You can't merge placement group
- ❗ Placement group must have unique name within AWS account.
- ❗ You can't move existing EC2 to placement group -> you can create AMI and launch new.
- 💡 AWS recommends homogenous instances within placement groups e.g. using same instance types.
- ***Creation***
  - Console -> EC2 -> Placement Groups -> Create Placement Group -> Select a strategy
  - You can now launch new EC2 instances in the placement group.
- **Placement Group Strategies**
  - **Cluster**
    - Clusters instances into a low-latency group in a single Availability Zone
      - ❗ Cannot span multiple AZ
    - High performance, high risk
      - High network throughput, low-latency (10 Gbps bandwidth between instances)
      - Same rack & same AZ -> If the rack fails, all instances fails at the same time.
    - 💡 Use cases
      - Big Data job that needs to complete fast
      - Application that needs extremely low latency and high network throughput.
  - **Spread**
    - Spreads instances across underlying hardware (❗ max 7 instances per group per AZ)
      - Ensures all instances are located in different hardware.
    - Can span across multi AZ.
    - Minimizes failure risks.
  - **Partition**
    - Spreads instances across many different partitions (which rely on different sets of racks) within an AZ.
    - Partitions are isolated from each other from hardware failures in different racks but not VMs.
    - Can span across multi AZ.
    - Scales to 100s of EC2 instances per group.
    - ❗ Up to 7 partitions per AZ
    - EC2 instances get access to the partition information as metadata
    - 💡 Use cases: HDFS, HBase, Cassandra, Kafka
