# Amazon S3

- Key / value store for objects
  - 💡 Great for big objects, not so great for small objects (latency)
  - It's object storage
    - Object => You rewrite entire object
    - Block store => You can just send changes to change the blob, can update incrementally as data is split into chunks.
- S3 is a global service (not region specific)
  - ❗ A bucket however is attached to a region
- Supports IPv6, IPv4.
- 💡 Use cases: Static files, Key value store for big files e.g. movies, Website hosting
- ***Objects*** (files) are stored in ***buckets*** (directories)
- **Buckets**
  - ❗ Bucket names must be unique across all existing bucket names in Amazon S3.
  - Buckets are defined at the region level and must have globally unique name as it'll following URLs
    - `https://s3-<region>.amazonaws.com/<bucket>/<object>`
    - `https://<bucket>.s3.amazonaws.com/<object>` (virtual host style addressing)
  - You can set default encryption
    - Options are: *None*, *AES-256* (SSE-S3) and *AWS-KMS* (SSE-KMS)
    - 📝Popular question: How to ensure that all objects can be encrypted at upload?
  - ❗ 100 S3 buckets per account -> soft limit
  - **Folders**
    - Can be created under buckets
    - ❗ They are pseudo and will be treated as object by S3
      - S3 has a flat structure with no hierarchy
      - But presentation in console gives the sense of "Directories"
  - **Version Control**
    - Can enable versioning at bucket level
      - ❗📝 Once enabled, it cannot be disabled but just suspended.
    - Same key overwrite will increment the version
    - Best practice as it allows to
      - Roll back to a previous version
      - Protection against **accidental deletion** i.e. unintended deletes.
        - Deleting files does not really delete versioned files
        - It only puts **Delete marker** and files can still be downloaded.
        - Deleting a delete marker -> Restores the object & adds a new delete marker.
          - ❗ Only the owner of a bucket can permanently remove a delete marker e.g. delete a version.
        - 💡 Best practice: Allow only specific users to delete & enforce MFA
    - 📝Any file that is not versioned prior to enabling versioning will have the version `null`.
- **Objects**
  - Have a **key** which is FULL path
    - e.g. `<my_bucket>/my_file.txt` or `<my_bucket>/my_folder1_another_folder/my_file.txt`
    - ❗ The are no concept of directories within buckets just key names with slashes.
  - ***Object values*** are the contents of the file
    - ❗ Max size is 5 TB, min size is 0 bytes (touched)
    - ❗ If file is more than 5 GB, you need to use multi part upload
    - ***Metadata*** is list of text key/value pairs.
      - Can be system or user metadata.
      - ❗ Cannot be modified after creation
  - ***Tags*** are unicode key/value pairs.
    - ❗ Up to 10
    - 💡 Useful for security / lifecycle / replication rules
- **Logging**
  - Object-level logging
  - Can enable CloudWatch request metrics: e.g. total number of HTTP GET/PUT, 4XX etc.
  - Can enable CloudTrail for auditing API calls and call stacks (not CloudWatch).
- 📝**S3 Consistency Model**
  - Read after write consistency for PUTS of **new objects**
    - E.g. `PUT 200` -> `GET 200`
    - ❗ Eventually consistent if you try to `GET` before to see if the object existed
      - E.g. `GET 404` -> `PUT 200` -> `GET 404` -> GET 404 gets cached
  - Eventual consistency for `DELETE`s and `PUTS` of **existing objects**
    - Read after updating object -> Might get an older version
      - E.g. `PUT 200` -> `PUT 200` -> `GET 200` (might be older version)
    - Delete -> Can retrieve it for a short time
      - E.g. `DELETE 200` -> `GET 200`
- **Make an object publicly accessible**
  - On object level
    - Set a predefined grant (also known as a canned ACL) for a bucket in Amazon S3.
      - In Console -> Bucket -> Permissions -> Public access settings -> Untick *"Block new public bucket policies"* and *"Block public and cross-account access if the bucket has public policies"*
    - Update the object's ACL -> Ensure your object is set to be publicly accessible.
  - On bucket level
    - Use a bucket policy that grants public read access to a specific object tag/prefix
- **Lifecycle Policies**
  - Set of rules to automating moving data between different tiers, to save storage cost.
  - **Transition actions**
    - When objects are transitioned to another storage class
    - E.g. General Purpose *--(60 days)-->* Infrequent Access *--(180 days)-->* glacier
    - ❗ Objects must be stored at least 30 days in standard for standard to => Standard IA or OneZone IA
  - **Expiration actions**
    - Expire & delete an object after a certain time period.
    - E.g. access log files can be set to delete after specified period of time
  - You can combine transition & expiration actions.
  - You can filter the resources by a key name prefix, e.g. `tax/` will only include `tax/doc1.txt`.
  - You can configure it to
    - Clean-up expired object delete markers
    - Affect "Current version" and & or "Previous version"
- **Multipart Upload**
  - Use if file is more than >100MB (required for >=5GB)
  - Allows uploading parts concurrently
    - Improved throughput
    - Quick recovery from any network failures
    - Pause and resume object uploads
    - Begin an upload before you know the final object size.
  - All storage that any parts the aborted multipart upload consumed is freed & deleted.
    - S3 supports a bucket lifecycle rule to abort multipart upload that don't complete within a specified number of days.
- **Event Notifications**
  - **Events**
    - Object created, object removed, object restored, object lost (of a [Reduced Redundancy Storage (RRS) storage](#s3-storage-classes))
  - **Destinations**
    - Determines where events will be published
    - Can be [SNS](./10.1.2.%20Integrations%20-%20Queues%20-%20SNS.md), [SQS](./10.1.1.%20Integrations%20-%20Queues%20-%20SQS.md) and [Lambda](./4.4.%20Compute%20-%20Lambda.md)

## S3 Pricing

- Charged mainly based on
  - Storage (per GB)
    - See [S3 storage classes](#s3-storage-classes)
  - Requests
    - Fee for each request make to S3 APIs for managing objects.
      - 💡 Usually very cheap, but can be a good idea to minimize the requests to optimize costs.
    - See also [Glacier](#glacier) for Glacier retrieval fees.
  - [Data transfer](./1.%20Introduction.md#data-transfer-charges)
  - Optional fees for • region replication • transfer acceleration • management • analytics
- **Requester pays**
  - Requester pays for requests + storage in bucket instead of bucket owner.
  - Requester is from AWS (not anonymous) & sends `requester-pays` flag and billed by AWS.
- See [S3 pricing page](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/pricing/) and [AWS Pricing Calculator](./1.%20Introduction.md#aws-pricing-calculator)

## S3 Storage Classes

- Storage class is set based on object
- **S3 Storage Tiers**

  | Storage | Description | Use-cases | Retrieval latency | Cost |
  | ------- | ----------- | --------- | ----------------- | ---- |
  | **Standard** | General purpose | Big Data analytics, mobile & gaming applications, content distribution... | ms | 💲💲💲💲💲💲 |
  | **Standard IA** | Infrequent access | For data that's less frequently accessed but requires rapid access e.g. you'll get a file directly every month. | ms | 💲💲💲💲💲 |
  | **One Zone-Infrequent Access** | Low latency & high throughput performance | Storing secondary backup copies of on-premise data or storing data you can recreate over time | ms | 💲💲💲💲 |
  | **Reduced Redundancy Storage (RRS)** | Deprecated, don't use it, use one zone-infrequent access | Noncritical, reproducible data at lower levels of redundancy than Amazon S3's standard storage | ms | 💲💲💲 |
  | **Intelligent Tiering** | ML moves objects between *IA* and *Standard* tiers based on changing access patterns | Unpredictable workloads, Changing access patterns, Lack of experience with storage optimization | ms | *(small)* Monitoring + auto-tiering fee |
  | **Glacier** | Low cost cold storage. | DR Back-ups, Media Asset Archival | Expedited: 1-5 min, Standard: 3-5 hr, Bulk: 5 -12 hr | 💲💲 + retrieval fee |
  | **Glacier Deep Archive** | Lowest cost coldest storage |  Magnetic tapes / VTL / Regulatory archiving  | 12-48 hours | 💲 + retrieval fee |
- **S3 Storage Tiers Reliability**

  | | Standard | Reduced Redundancy Storage | Standard Infrequent Access | One - Infrequent Access | S3 Intelligent Tiering | Glacier |
  |--|--|--|--|--|--|--|
  | **Durability** | 99.999999999% | 99.99% | 99.999999999% | 99.999999999% | 99.999999999% | 99.999999999% |
  | **Availability** | 99.99% | 99.99% | 99.99% | 99.5% | 99.9% | No SLA |
  | **AZ** | ≥3 | ≥2 | ≥3 | 1 | ≥3 | ≥3 |
  | **Concurrent facility fault tolerance** | 2 | 1 | 2 | 0 | 1 | 1 |

### Glacier

- Glacier classes moves objects to **Amazon Glacier** which is part of S3.
- **Concepts**
  - **Archive**: store data in (one or more files) with unique archive ID.
    - 📝The content of the archive is immutable, meaning that after an archive is created it cannot be updated.
  - **Vault**: collection of archives where you upload data to.
- **Retrieval**
  - ❗ S3 object stored through Glacier can only be retrieved with S3 APIs as it'll map object path to archive id.
  - **Options**

    | Attribute | Expedited | Standard | Bulk |
    | --------- | --------- | -------- | ---- |
    | Data | Subset of archives | Any archive | Large amounts |
    | Time | 1 - 5 minutes | 3 - 5 hours | 5 -12 hours |
    | Pricing | 💲💲💲💲 | 💲💲 | 💲 |
    - **Expedited**: Access subset of archives in 1-5 minutes.
      - **On-demand**: Accepted except for rare high load situations.
      - **Provisioned**: Buy capacity to ensure that your retrieval capacity is available.
    - **Standard**: Access any archive in 3-5 hours.
    - **Bulk**: Access large amounts in 5-12 hours
  - ❗ Deep Archive has only one option for retrieval time around 12-48 hours.
- ❗ You cannot upload directly from console, possible only through AWS CLI.

## Availability

- **Cross region replication (CCR)**
  - Copying is asynchronous replication
  - On bucket level (entire bucket) or object level (based on prefix/tags)
  - ❗📝 Must enable versioning (source and destination)
    - CRR is built on top of versioning functionality.
    - 🤗 As the replication is asynchronous, it needs 'non-changing' copy of data during replication
      - Versioning makes it easy so file can still be modified (upload, delete, etc.) while replication is in progress.
  - Buckets must be in different AWS regions & can be in different accounts
  - Requires IAM permissions to S3
  - Delete markers & deleting individual versions / delete markers are not replicated.
  - **Use cases**: compliance, lower latency access, replication across accounts
  - Flow:
    1. Create a bucket, and one more new one as replica
    2. Original bucket -> Management -> Replication -> Add rule
       - Apply to *entire bucket* or *"prefix or tags"*
    3. Choose if objects encrypted with AWS KMS will also be encrypted
       - Other account must also have access to AWS KMS as well
    4. For replicated objects you can change
       - Storage class
       - Ownership to destination bucket owner
    5. Set IAM rule
       - Role gets created automatically that gives replication permissions to the original bucket
    - ❗ Does not replicate:
      - Existing files are not replicated, just new files but with same metadata and ACLs.
      - Replicas of other objects, lifecycle actions and configurations, objects without bucket owner permissions, SSE-C & SSE-KMS encrypted object (can be configured to replicate)...

## S3 Websites

- S3 can host static websites and have them accessible on the www.
  - 📝 The website URL will be => bucket name + `s3-website` + region + `amazonaws.com`.
    - `<bucket-name>.s3-website-<AWS-region>.amazonaws.com`
    - `<bucket-name>.s3-website.<AWS-region>.amazonaws.com`
- If you get 403 (Forbidden) error; make sure bucket policy allows public reads!
- Supports redirects through a metadata tag.
- In bucket -> Properties -> Static website hosting
  - Select `Use this bucket to host a website` (optionally specify default index and error files)
  - Another option is to redirect requests (to another place)
  - **S3 CORS** (CORS=Cross Origin Resource Sharing)
    - 📝 If you request data from another S3 bucket, you need to enable CORS
    - Allows you to limit the number of websites that can request your files in S3 and this way limit costs.
    - E.g. `bucket1` has image in `bucket2`. `bucket2` must then has CORS headers for `bucket1`.
- **Prerequisites**
  - ❗ The bucket must have the same name as your domain or subdomain.
  - *(Optionally)* Use CloudFront for SSL/TLS
  - A registered domain name.
  - Route 53 as DNS service for the domain to configure DNS.
