# S3 Security

- Bucket owner = root account owning the e-mail address.
- It supports Gateway VPC endpoints to be accessed in VPC without internet access
  - Gateway VPC Endpoint = an endpoint network interface (ENI)
- **Object / Bucket Permissions**
  - **User permissions**: *User ID* has Read / Write access to *Bucket* / *Object*?
  - **Public permissions**: Public read access to bucket or not
  - **System permissions**: Grant Amazon S3 Log Delivery group write access to the group
- **MFA Delete**
  - MFA (multi factor authentication) forces user to generate a code on device (mobile phone or hardware) before doing important operations on S3.
  - To use MFA-Delete, enable ***Versioning*** on the S3 bucket.
  - 💡 You will need MFA to
    - permanently delete an object version
    - suspend versioning on the bucket
  - 💡 Give only right users permissions for delete.
  - ❗ Only the bucket owner (root account) can enable/disable MFA-delete.
  - ❗ MFA-delete currently can only be enabled using the CLI
  - ❗ Affects only permanent deletes not delete markers
  - ***Flow***: Create bucket with versioning -> Log-into root account -> Link to MFA Device (IAM -> Security Credentials) -> Generate root access keys -> Connect to CLI -> Set `MFADelete=enabled` with CLI command
- **S3 Pre-signed URLs**
  - 📝 Allows granting access (URL) to one or more users for a certain amount and time and expire it.
    - URL can be used for `GET` (read) or `PUT` (upload).
    - Can generate pre-signed URLs using SDK (uploads as it's harder) or CLI
    - Valid for a default of 3600 seconds, can change timeout with `--expires-in <time-by-seconds>` argument
  - Users given a pre-signed URL inherit the permissions of the person who generated the URL for GET / PUT
  - E.g. premium video service for logged in users where they can view & list & upload temporarily.
  - Command: `presign <S3URI> --expires-in <time-by-seconds> --region <region-of-object>`
    - 💡 You can run `aws configure set default.s3.signature_version s3v4` for making URL to be compatible with KMS encrypted object before signing

## Logging and Auditing

- **Logging and Audit**
  - **CloudTrail**
    - Logs bucket-level API calls
    - Logs S3 object-level API activity e.g. `GetObject`, `DeleteObject`, and `PutObject API` operations.
    - Also called **CloudTrail Data Events**
  - **S3 access logs**
    - Logs object-level API activity
    - ***Flow***: Go to properties -> Turn on *Server Access Logging* -> Choose bucket
  - **Access logs vs Object-Level CloudTrail logs**

    | | Server Access Logging | Object-Level Logging |
    | -- | --------------------- | -------------------- |
    | **Complexity** | Low | High |
    | **Format** | Loosely-structured, space-delimited text records | JSON |
    | **Delivery** | Timeliness & delivery are not guaranteed | API calls within 15 min are a captured and sent within 5 min |
    | **Filtering** | No filtering | Cloud Trail (basic), Cloud Watch (advanced, e.g. regex) |
    | **Integrations** | S3 | S3, CloudTrail, CloudWatch |
    | **Costs** | S3 | S3, CloudTrail, CloudWatch |
  - ❗ Do not store your own access logs in the same bucket, otherwise; recursion
  - Data can be analyzed using data analysis tools
    - Also **Amazon Athena** and **S3 Select** can be used to query access logs
  - You can set prefixes for the logs

## Policies

- **User based policies**
  - **IAM policies**
  - which API calls should be allowed for specific user from IAM console
  - 💡 IAM policies instead of S3 bucket policies are in general more operationally efficient.
    - You need to control access to AWS services other than S3
      - Easier to manage everything from IAM instead of spreading
    - You have numerous S3 buckets each with different permissions requirements
      - Easier to manage with a few IAM policies instead of policy per bucket.
- **Resource based policies**
  - 📝 **Bucket policies**
    - Allows cross account
    - JSON based policy (can be generated from Policy Generator)
      - `Resources`: buckets or objects
      - `Actions`: Set of API to Allow or Deny
      - `Effect`: Allow / Deny
      - `Principal`: The account or user to apply the policy to
    - 💡 Use-cases
      - **📝Force objects to be encrypted at upload**
        1. Save statements in *Bucket Policy*:
           1. Create bucket policy -> ***Deny*** if any ***principal*** ( `*` ) uses ***action*** `PutObject` has ***condition*** header `x-amz-server-side-encryption` *EqualsTo* `null` is `true`.
           2. Create bucket policy -> ***Deny*** if any ***principal*** ( `*` ) uses ***action*** `PutObject` has ***condition*** header `x-amz-server-side-encryption` *StringNotEquals* `AES256`
        2. Set *Default Encryption* as *Amazon S3 master-key* to set the right header when uploading from console.
      - Grant access to another account (Cross Account)
      - Grant public access to the bucket
    - **Syntax for including root and its endpoints**
      - ❗ Careful: In policies if you use `arn` *(amazon resource name)* with only `/` e.g.it'll not apply policy to all endpoints under it you need to define it as with `/*`.
        - E.g. `arn:awss3::::thebucketname/*` instead of `arn:awss3::::thebucketname/`.
        - URL with `/*` will not include the root URL, if you need root as well use both `/` and `/*`.
  - **Object Access Control List (ACL)**
    - Access policy option to grant basic read/write permissions to other AWS accounts on object level.
      - E.g. account X can *list objects*, *write objects*, *read bucket permissions*, *write bucket permissions*
  - **Bucket Access Control List (ACL)**: Less common
  - **Glacier**
    - Can have:
      - Single resource-based vault access policy
      - Single **Vault Lock policy**
        - For compliance e.g. can deny users permissions to delete an archive until the archive has existed for one year.
        - 💡 After the vault is locked it cannot be unlocked

## Encryption

- **Encryption at rest**
  - S3 Glacier encrypts your data at rest by default.
  - 4 methods of encrypting objects:
    1. **SSE-S3** (Server Side Encryption - S3)
       - Encrypts S3 objects using keys handled & managed by AWS
       - Object is encrypted server side
       - AES-256
         - 📝 You must set header `"x-amz-server-side-encryption":"AES256"`
       - S3 provides ***S3 Managed Data Key*** as encryption key
         - Also called Amazon S3 master-key
       - Works with HTTP + HTTPS
    2. **SSE-KMS** (Server Side Encryption - Key Management Service)
       - Leverage AWS Key Management Service to manage encryption
       - KMS advantages: user control (over rotation of key) + audit trail (how the key was used)
       - Object is encrypted server side
       - 📝 Must set header `"x-amz-server-side-encryption":"aws:kms"`
       - KMS generates & uses CMK (***Customer Master Key***) as encryption key.
         - Also called AWS KMS master-key
         - You can select a key from KMS
       - Works with HTTP + HTTPS
       - 💡 Maintain control of the rotation policy for the encryption keys, but not know the encryption keys values
    3. **SSE-C** (Server Side Encryption - Customer)
       - When you want to fully manage your own encryption keys
       - ❗ HTTPS must be used (no HTTP)
       - Encryption key must be provided in HTTP headers for every HTTP request made
       - Uses client side data key
       - Amazon does the encryption & throws every key and returns data.
       - 💡 Recommended over client side encryption if you need to ensure that encryption is always used.
    4. **Client Side Encryption**
       - Client library such as *Amazon S3 Encryption Client* makes it easier.
       - Clients encrypt & decrypt data themselves
       - Clients fully manages the keys and the encryption cycle
       - Works with HTTP + HTTPS
  - Responsibilities

    | Encryption type | Who en/decrypts the data | Who stores the secret | Who manages the secret |
    |---:|:------------------------:|:---------------------:|:----------------------:|
    | **SSE-S3** | AWS | AWS | AWS |
    | **SSE-KMS** (AWS managed CMK) | AWS | AWS | AWS |
    | **SSE-KMS** (customer managed CMK) | AWS  | AWS | you |
    | **SSE-C** | AWS | you | you |
    | **AWS SDK + KMS** (AWS managed CMK) | you | AWS | AWS |
    | **AWS SDK + KMS** (customer managed KMS) | you | AWS | you |
    | **AWS SDK + self-managed secret** | you | you | you |
  - **SDK**
    - AWS SDK supports for Amazon S3 Client-Side Encryption
    - **AWS Encryption SDK** is an encryption library that is separate from the language–specific SDKs.
    - Difference between AWS SDK (in language-specific AWS SDKs) vs Encryption SDK
      - Encryption SDK is not tied to Amazon S3 and can be used to encrypt or decrypt data to be stored anywhere.
      - Good for enforcing best practices in organization.
- **Encryption in transit (SSL)**
  - 📝Achieved by SSL/TLS
  - S3 exposes HTTP and HTTPS URL, HTTP has encryption in flight.
- **Default Encryption**
  - Encryption is per object level, but you might want to enforce encryption of all objects.
  - ***Old way***: Use a bucket policy and refuse any HTTP command without the proper headers
  - ***New way***: Enable *Default Encryption* setting on S3 by ticking.
    - Bucket policies are evaluated before *default encryption*
    - You can choose between SSE-S3 (AES-256) or SSE-KMS (AWS-KMS)
