# CloudFront

- Content Delivery Network (CDN)
- Improves read performance, content is cached at the edge locations (+136 point of presence globally)
- 📝 Popular with S3 but works with EC2, Load balancing
- Can help protect against network attacks
- You use domain name that CloudFront assigns to your distribution, e.g. cannot attach Elastic IP.
- **Security**
  - Can provide SSL encryption (HTTPS) at the edge using ACM (AWS Certificate Manager)
    - Supports: **Perfect Forward Secrecy** (new SSL key for each session)
  - Can protect against DDoS attacks.
- ***Geo Restriction*** allows you to specify a list of whitelisted or blacklisted countries in your CloudFront distribution.
- A ***distribution*** is a CloudFront instance (collection of edge locations) that can be:
  - ***Web distributions*** -> Web pages
  - 📝 ***RTMP*** -> a video/media (streaming) protocol over SSL
    - For RTMP CloudFront distributions files must be stored in an S3 bucket
- You set up ***origin*** (domain name & path)
  - Origin can be S3, EC2, ELB, or Route53.
  - **Origin Failover**: Set-up primary + secondary origins on selection of 500, 502, 503, 504, 404, or 403.
    - 💡 Enables high availability.
- ***Cache Behavior settings***
  - Can set-up viewer Protocol Policy: HTTP & HTTPS, Redirect HTTP to HTTPS, HTTPS only
  - Can allow HTTP Methods: GET & HEAD & PUT & OPTIONS & PATCH & DELETE.
  - Set minimum maximum & default TTL
  - Forward cookies and/or query strings
  - And more: e.g.  Path Pattern, Compress objects
- ***Distribution Settings*** are • Price Class • AWS WAF Web ACL • Alternate Domain Names (CNAMEs), SQL certificate • Supported HTTP versions, logging (with log prefix & option to include cookies) • Enable IPv6
- 📝You can clear cache objects by creating an ***invalidation*** but you will be charged.
  - 💡 AWS recommends versioned file names instead of invalidating if files are updated frequently.
  - Integrates with **AWS Shield** for DDoS protection.
  - Integrates with **AWS WAF** for application layer security.
- **Regional Edge Cache**: If data is infrequently accessed, instead of CloudFront sends request back to your origin, it caches your data in a regional edge caches and gets from there (faster).
- 💡 Use cases
  - Accelerate uploads -> Users can upload to edge locations
  - Can stream videos from edge locations
  - Used in general to accelerate other services e.g. S3 for e.g. faster upload.
  - Allows Lambda with Lambda@Edge to run in edge locations.
  - Integrates with API gateway to run on edge locations.
  - Use with any text, blob (e.g. `.pdf`)
- `Cache-Control` and `Expires` headers control how long objects stay in the cache.
  - `Cache-Control max-age` lets you specify how long (in seconds) you want an object to remain in the cache before CloudFront gets the object again from the origin server.
    - Minimum 0, Max 3600

## S3 & CloudFront

- Allows to directly upload to and read from edge locations.
- **Transfer acceleration**
  - In S3 enables faster transfers through routing from CloudFront's edge locations.
  - 💡 Costs extra but not always fastest, test it.
  - Supports multipart uploads.
- **CloudFront vs S3 Cross Region Replication**

  | Attribute | CloudFront | S3 Cross Region Replication |
  | --------- | ---------- | --------------------------- |
  | Cache location | Global edge network | Each unique region you set up for replication |
  | Cache duration | TTL | Updated in near real time |
  | Can write? | Yes, can put object | Read-only |
  | Use case | Static content that must be available everywhere | Dynamic content that needs to available at low-latency in few regions |
- 📝You can enable **Restrict Bucket Access**
  - Requires users to always access S3 content using CloudFront URLs, not S3 URLs
  - Grants permissions to *Origin Access Identity* for `GetObject`.
    - ***Origin Access Identity*** is Identity for CloudFront distribution
- **Origin Access Identity**
  - More secure: Clients must go through CloudFront, cannot go directly to S3
  - Serving static content, globally
    - Client **<--** CloudFront **-->** Amazon S3
  - Serving static content, globally, **securely**
    - Client **<--** CloudFront *(OAI: Origin Access Identity)* **<-->** Amazon S3 *(bucket policy + only authorize from OAI)*
- 📝**CloudFront Signed URL / Signed Cookies**
  - It's commonly use to give access to paid content
    - E.g. you want to distribute paid shared content to premium users over the world & content lives in S3.
    - ❗ If S3 can only be accessed through CloudFront, self-signed S3 URLs cannot be used.
      - 💡 We can use CloudFront Signed URL.
  - Security: e.g. **IP restriction**
  - ❗ Can only be created using the AWS SDK
  - Flow:
    - Attach a policy with
      - URL expiration
        - 💡 URL invalidation best practices
          - Shared content (movie, music): make it short e.g. a few minutes
          - Private content (private to the user): make it last for years.
      - IP ranges to access the data from
      - Trusted signers (which AWS accounts can create signed URLs)
    - You need to write an application:
      - *Client* gets *signed URL* from *application* where *application* talks to *Amazon CloudFront* using SDK to generate a signed URL
  - **Example architecture**: API Gateway **-->** Lambda *(Creates signed URL & verifies if user is premium with DynamoDB)* **-->** CloudFront *(issues signed URL)* **<---** OAI: Origin Access Identity **-->** S3 (serves videos + authorizes only from OAI with a bucket policy)

## API Gateway & CloudFront

- CloudFront in front is generally not a good idea.
  - Most of the functionality in CloudFront can be found API gateway.
    - You can use ***edge-optimized*** endpoints in API Gateway.
      - CF usage is already included on API GW pricing.
- Deploy it if you want to fully control CloudFront distribution
  - E.g. manage WAF, add custom behaviors (static files on S3, some paths going to an ALB or other API), host API on multiple regions, set-up CF access logs etc.
