# Infrastructure as Code

## CI/CD

### Continuous Integration

- Developers push the code to a code repository often
  - GitHub, BitBucket, ***CodeCommit*** (in AWS) etc...
- A testing / build server checks the code as soon as it's pushed
  - Jenkins CI, TeamCity, ***CodeBuild*** (in AWS), etc...
  - The developer gets feedback about the tests and checks that have passed / failed
- Helps
  - Find bugs early, fix bugs
  - Deliver faster as the code is tested
  - Deploy often
  - Happier developers, as they're unblocked

### Continuous Delivery

- Ensure that the software can be released reliably whenever needed.
- Ensures deployments happen often and are quick
- Automated deployment -> Shift away from e.g. "one release every 3 months" to 5 releases a day.
- ***CodeDeploy*** in AWS, Jenkins CD, Spinnaker, etc...

### Technology Stack

- **AWS CodePipeline** allows you to automate all steps of the deployment:

  | Step | Name | AWS | Others |
  | ---- | --- | ---- | ------ |
  | 1 | Code | CodeCommit | GitHub, GitLab etc.. |
  | 2 | Build & test | CodeBuild | Jenkins CI, TeamCity etc.. |
  | 3 | Deploy | ElasticBeanstalk, CodeDeploy | Octopus |
  | 4 | Provision | ElasticBeanstalk, CloudFormation | Terraform |

- **CodeDeploy**
  - Two deployment options:
    1. **In-place deployment**: EC2/On-Premises apps are stopped & updated & validated.
    2. **Blue/green deployment**: Using slots (deploy A -> switch to A -> stop B) with minimal downtime and rollback capabilities.
       - **EC2/On-Premises**: Must have one ore more EC2 with tags or ASG
       - **Lambda**
         - **Canary**: Traffic is sifted in two increments, 90% to first version, 10% to second before 100% to second.
         - **Linear**: Traffic is shifted in equal increments with number of minutes e.g. 10% per minute.
         - **All-at-once**: All traffic is shifted at once.
       - **Amazon ECS**: Task set switches

## CloudFormation

- Code will be deployed and create / update / delete infrastructure
  - Can be JSON or YAML.
- Can be part of disaster recovery strategy.
- Declarative way of outlining AWS infrastructure for any resources (most of them are supported)
  - CloudFormation provisions in the *right order* with the *exact configuration* that you specify.
- 💡 Allows re-use the best practices around your company for configuration parameters.
- **Templates**
  - You can upload in S3 and then reference in CloudFormation
  - Update a template
    - Can't edit previous ones.
    - Have to re-upload a new version of the template to AWS.
  - **Building Blocks**
    - Cloud formation template consists of components and helpers:
      - Template components
        1. **Resources**: your AWS resources declared in the template (❗ mandatory)
        2. **Parameters**: the dynamic inputs for your template
           - Allows you to parameterize & prompt inputs while deploying.
        3. **Mappings**: the static variables for your template
        4. **Outputs**: References to what has been created
        5. **Conditionals**: List of conditions to perform resource creation
        6. **Metadata**
      - Template helpers
        1. References (***Logical IDs*** are used to reference resources within the template)
        2. Functions
- **Templates**
  - JSON or YAML text file that contains instructions for building out AWS environment
- **Change sets**
  - Before making changes to your resources, you can generate a change set, which is a summary of your proposed changes, e.g. resource A will be deleted.
- **Stacks**
  - The entire environment described by the template and created, updated, and deleted as a single unit
  - Related resources in a template.
    - When you update stack, it updates the resources
  - Can rollback on failure after timeout in minutes.
  - Termination protected with stack from being accidentally deleted.
  - **Monitoring**
    - Fires events such as on resource creation
    - Can have monitoring time (CloudFormation monitors resources during X minutes after creation)
    - Can set up CloudWatch alarms if something fails.
  - Can have IAM role or policy to deny/allow access.
  - Can use sample template or create one in Designer.
  - Identified by name
  - Can have input parameters that'll be filled from portal.
  - Reusable output information
    - It's output information (key, value, description) can be imported by other stacks by using an unique export/import name.
  - **Stack Sets** lets you create stacks in AWS accounts across regions by using a single AWS CloudFormation template
  - Operations
    - **Deleting a stack** -> deletes every artifact created by CloudFormation
    - **Deploying templates/stacks**
      1. by uploading YAML files directly or referencing to Amazon S3 URL
      2. Use a sample template
      3. Create template in Designer
         - Helps you to see resources & relations
         - Might be good for PowerPoints
      - ❗ Redeploying a stack deletes old instances.
    - **Changing a stack**
      - Done using **Stack change sets**
      - Warns you about resources that'll be deleted, modified and added.
      - **Drift**: difference between the expected configuration values and actual deployed.
        - Allows you to better manage your CloudFormation stacks and ensure consistency in your resource configurations
- Can deploy Elastic Beanstalk that'll then deploy:
  - E.g. EC2, ALB, ASG, RDS
- **IAM Conditions for CloudFormation**
  - `cloudformation:TemplateURL`: Ensure template in TemplateURL is used for e.g. update/delete.
  - `cloudformation:ResourceTypes`: Specify which types of resources can be created or updated.
  - `cloudformation:StackPolicyURL`
    - **Stack policies** prevents stack resources from unintentionally being updated or deleted during stack updates
    - You define which actions (t.ex. update) are allowed on which resources in a JSON file.

### Benefits

- **Control**
  - No resources are manually created / configured.
  - Code can be version controlled e.g. using git.
  - Changes are reviewed through code
  - Cost control:
    - Each stack has ID: follow-up costs.
    - Estimate costs of a stack.
    - You can automate deletion of templates at 5 PM and recreation at 8 AM safely.
- **More productivity**:
  - Destroy and re-create an infrastructure on the cloud on the fly.
  - Automated generation of diagram for your templates!
  - Declarative programming (no need to figure out ordering and orchestration)
- Better separation of concerns:
  - Many stacks for many apps, and many layers.
  - E.g. VPC stacks, network stacks, app stacks

## OpsWorks

- AWS managed service for Chef & Puppet
- They work great with EC2 & On Premise VM
- Alternative to AWS SSM (Systems Manager)
- **OpsWorks stacks**
  - Groups applications into layers depending on Chef recipes
  - No need to provision chef server
  - Uses the embedded Chef solo client that is installed on EC2 instances on your behalf

## Systems Manager

- Serverless & free & open-source
- Is built-in in AWS AMIs
- Does not require any jump-boxes (bastion hosts)
- Can run Ansible, PowerShell DSC or any script from S3 through **Run command**.
- Can use AWS Systems Manager Automation
  - Leverages documents for tasks that can be automated.

### Chef & Puppet

- Help with managing server configuration as code
- Helps in having consistent deployments
  - Can automate: user accounts, cron, NTP, packages, services
- They leverage "Recipes" or "Manifests"
- Similar to SSM / Beanstalk / CloudFormation but they're open-source tools that work cross-cloud.

## Serverless applications

- Serverless applications are e.g. Lambda, DynamoDB, API Gateway...
- To be order to locally run, debug and easily deploy serverless applications you can use:
  - **AWS Serverless Application Model (AWS SAM)**
    - Open source tool used to package, test, and deploy serverless applications
    - YAML based infrastructure as code.
  - **serverless.com**
    - Vendor-neutral (Azure, Google, AWS) serverless framework.
    - YAML-based infrastructure as code.
