# RDS (Relational Database Service)

- Managed Aurora / PostgreSQL / MySQL / MariaDB / Oracle / SQL Server
- ðŸ’¡ Use cases: Relational datasets (RDBMS, OLTP), transactional SQL queries.
- Must provision an EC2 instance & EBS Volume type and size
  - You can reserve RDS Reserved Instances from 1 to 3 years.
- ***Maintenance***: Auto minor version upgrade, Maintenance window (when)
- ***DB parameter group*** acts as a container for engine configuration values that are applied to one or more DB instances.
  - Changing groups = recreate a new group & assign (you can copy existing)
- **MySQL & PostgreSQL engines**
  - MyISAM (storage engine)
    - Use for intense, full-text search capability,
    - Not recommended overall
  - InnoDB is recommended (better crash recovery)
    - Compatible with Aurora
- **Monitoring dashboards**
  - CloudWatch monitors metrics from its hyper-visor, very high level.
  - **Enhanced Monitoring**
    - Collects metrics within the agent
    - For each processes or threads use CPU, memory, disk, their virtual size etc.
    - Pros
      - smaller monitoring interval results
      - pay only for monitoring that exceeds the free tier provided by Amazon CloudWatch Logs.
    - Cons
      - Compute-intensive workload have more OS process activity to report and higher costs.

## Security

- Usually deployed within a private subnet, not in a public one.
- Network level
  - Are into **VPC**
  - **DB subnet group** allows you to specify set of subnets in your VPC for your instances.
  - **Security groups**
- Can allow public accessibility (outside VPC access with public IP)
  - Gets an endpoint like `sqldb.c2bqxjtofpnk.eu-west-3.rds.amazonaws.com`)
  - I.e. does not & cannot have an IP address.
- IAM policies help control who can ***manage*** AWS RDS
- â— You cannot access the SSH into underlying instances directly by design.
- To connect:
  1. Traditional username and password
  2. IAM DB Authentication (for MySQL & Aurora)
     - Provides an IAM DB authentication.
     - Lifespan of an authentication token is 15 minutes (short-lived)
     - ðŸ’¡ Recommended over username & password
     - â— Ensures SSL must be used when connecting to the database
- **Encryption**
  - **Encryption at rest** capability with AWS KMS - AES-256 encryption
    - â— Can only be enabled when you first create the DB instance
      - ðŸ’¡ You can however: unencrypted EB -> snapshot -> copy snapshot as encrypted -> create DB from snapshot
    - **Transparent Data Encryption**
      - TDE is an encryption type which encrypts the ***data*** and ***log files*** of a database.
        - It means encrypting databases both on the hard drive and consequently on backup media.
        - Key is stored in master database -> Protection of backup files as they don't have the DEK (***database encryption key***)
          - Restoring from back-up requires same DEK in the destination database.
        - Enabling TDE also encrypts your `tempdb`.
      - â— Only for Oracle or SQL Server DB instance only as its their technology.
        - Cannot be used on Postgres or MySQL but similar feature is KMS Encryption
      - TDE can be used on top of KMS - may affect performance.
  - **SSL certificates** to encrypt data to RDS in flight
    - ðŸ“To ***enforce*** SSL
      - *PostgreSQL*: `rds.force_ssl = 1` in the AWS RDS Console (Parameter Groups)
      - *MySQL*: Within the DB: `GRANT USAGE ON *.* TO 'mysqluser'@'%' REQUIRESSL;`
    - To ***connect*** using SSL
      - Provide the SSL Trust certificate (can be downloaded from AWS).
      - Provide SSL options when connecting
  - **Encryption of Read Replicas**
    - If in same region => encrypted using same key as the master instance
    - Different regions => you encrypt using the encryption key for that region

## Scalability

- Vertical scaling with EC2 sizing
  - â— Resizing makes database temporarily unavailable (generally a few minutes).
    - ðŸ’¡ For minimal downtime: resize reader instance and then promote it to its own DB.
  - Occur during the maintenance window if you don't choose to apply it directly.
  - **Amazon RDS Storage Types**
    - **General Purpose SSD**: Cost effective, can burst to 3.000 for limited time.
    - **Provisioned IOPS**: I/O-intensive workloads, particularly database workloads, that require low I/O latency and consistent I/O throughput.
    - **Magnetic**: for backward compatibility, lower storage, not recommended
- **Read replicas**
  - Enables horizontal read scaling.
  - Cannot be auto-scaled.
  - Replicate master to replicas asynchronously
  - Each read replica will have separate DNS endpoint.
  - Improves read performance
  - Within AZ, Cross AZ or Cross Region
  - Replicas can be promoted to their own DB -> breaks replication with the read replica.
  - Can have own Multi-AZ copies.
  - MySQL & MariaDB read replicas can have read replicas
  - You can migrate to Aurora by creating Aurora Read Replica (single click).
  - â— Must enable back-ups to enable read replica (not Aurora).
    - The replica is built by 1st restoring from the backup, and then only replicating blocks / record of changes since the backup was taken
  - â— You can create up to 5 read replicas
  - â— Not available for SQL server.
  - â— SELECT (=read) only kind of statements (not INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE)
  - â— Read replicas does not help with disaster recovery
    - You cannot failover to a read replica, use Multi-AZ instead.
- **Auto-scaling**
  - *For horizontal scaling*: Not available for read replicas
  - *For vertical scaling*: **RDS Storage Auto Scaling** automatically scales storage capacity in response to growing database workloads, with zero downtime.

## Availability

- **Point in Time Restore**: Continuous backups and restore to specific timestamp
  - **RDS Backups**: Automatically enabled
    - **Automated backups**
      - Daily full snapshot of the database
      - Capture transaction logs in real time -> ability to restore to any point in time by applying transaction logs to the latest snapshot
      - Retention between 1 to 35 (â— max) days (default: 7 days)
      - ðŸ’¡ If you want to copy database: Restore from a snapshot, the database will have schemas and ready & will be quicker than big create query.
    - **DB Snapshots**
      - Manually triggered by the user
      - Retention of backup for as long as you want
      - When you delete an instance you can choose whether to create a final snapshot of the DB instance.
        - ðŸ’¡ Should be set as default with CloudFormation.
    - â— I/O may be briefly suspended while the backup process initializes (typically under a few seconds), and you may experience a brief period of elevated latency.
    - Restored DBs will always be a new RDS instance with a new DNS endpoint.
    - You can restore up to the last 5 minutes.
- **Multi AZ**
  - Seamless sync replication of master DB to standby replica in another AZ
    - You cannot read from it, for it see read replicas.
  - One DNS name - automatic app failover to standby
  - Not used for scaling but for DR.
  - ðŸ“ When rebooting you can select to fail-over to other AZ.
  - **Multi AZ vs Read Replicas**

    | Attribute | Multi-AZ Deployments | Read Replicas |
    | --------- | -------------------- | ------------- |
    | **Replication** | Synchronous replication, Durable | Asynchronous replication, Scalable |
    | **Accessibility** | ðŸ‘Ž Only primary instance is active | ðŸ‘ Accessible and can be used for read scaling |
    | **Backups** | ðŸ‘ Automated backups are taken from standby (no I/O on primary) | ðŸ‘Ž No backups configured by default |
    | **Zone** | Always span two Availability Zones within a single Region | Can be within an Availability Zone, Cross-AZ, or Cross-Region |
    | **DR** | ðŸ‘ Automatic failover to standby when a problem is detected | ðŸ‘Ž Can be manually promoted to a standalone database instance |
  - **Single AZ -> Multi AZ**
    - AWS does: snapshot primary instance, create new standby instance from snapshot in different AZ, configure synchronous replication between primary and snapshot.
- **Backtrack** rewinds the DB cluster to the time you specify
  - Does not replace point-of-time restore to back-ups
  - You can easily undo mistakes.
- **Multi regions** for DR (Disaster Recovery).
