# Aurora

- Compatible API for PostgreSQL / MySQL
- Define EC2 instance type for aurora instances
- **Automatic fail-over**: Failover in Aurora is instantaneous. It's HA native.
- **Auto-expanding**: Automatically grows in increments of 10 GB, up to 64 TB
- Does not have free tier.
- DB engine can be MySQL / Postgres with version
- DB instance must have unique identifier unique in AWS region
- Other features: backup and recovery, industry compliance, push-button scaling, automated patching with zero downtime, advanced monitoring, routine maintenance
- **Capacity types**
  - ***Provisioned***: Provision and manage the instance sizes
  - ***Serverless***: Specify min and max resources and Aurora auto-scales
  - ***Multi-AZ deployment***: Through replicas in different zone
- Can enable Enhanced monitoring for more metrics.
- **Monitoring**: Export log types to publish to Amazon CloudWatch (Audit, Error, General, Slow query)
- **Deletion protection**: You can't delete the database (protects from accidental deletions)
- You can handle parameters using
  - DB Parameter Group
  - DB Cluster Parameter Group
  - Option groups
- **Pricing**
  - Aurora costs more than RDS (20% more) but more efficient
  - Billed per IO.
    - **Read IO**: Every database page read operation is 1 IO.
    - **Write IO**: Pushing transaction logs to shared storage for high availability.
- 💡 Improve query performances
  - **Hash Joins**: If you need to join a large amount of data by using an equijoin.
  - **Asynchronous key prefetch (AKP)** Improve the performance of queries that join tables across indexes
- **Aurora DB Cluster**

## Aurora DB Cluster

- Cluster-types
  - **Multi-master clusters**
    - All DB instances have read-write capability.
  - **Single-master clusters**
    - Has two instances types:
      1. **Primary DB instance**: master
         - Each Aurora DB cluster has one primary DB instance.
         - You can use MySQL / PostgreSQL RDS as master in a cluster
      2. **Aurora Replica**
         - Read-only replicas of master
- **Cluster endpoints**
  - **Reader endpoint**: Read replicas
  - **Writer endpoint**: Master
    - If master fails, clients still talk to the endpoint and will be redirected to the right instance
  - **Custom Endpoints**: E.g. point analytics workload to higher memory capacity replicas
  - 💡 Best practice: connect writer endpoint to write and reader endpoint to read.

## Availability

- Automated **backups** are always enabled.
  - Or use ***Backtrack*** to restore data at any point of time without using backups
  - You can also take **snapshots** & share with other AWS accounts without impacting performance.
    - User-created snapshots are retained after deleting the DB.
    - You can share snapshots across accounts.
- Faster RTO than other RDS engines by making buffer cache of DB immediately available.
- **Multi-AZ** by default with 6 copies (replicas) across 3 AZ:
  - 4 copies out of 6 needed for writes
  - 3 copies out of 6 need for reads
  - You can add additional MySQL or Aurora (recommended) replicas.
    - External MySQL databases as replicas are supported.
    - ❗ Global databases are recommended instead.
- You can have **multi-region** replicas.
- Self healing with peer-to-peer replication
  - Auto healing i.e. Aurora will recover if we lose one replica
- One Aurora Instance takes writes (master)
- Automated failover for master in less than 30 seconds
- **Failover behavior**
  - You can failover to any replica -> Secondary becomes the master, replication breaks.
    - You can assign priority for replicas, or the one which has same size as primary will be more prioritized.
  - **Single instance**: Create a new DB in the same AZ, if it fails => try different AZ
    - RTO: 15 min
  - **Multi replicas**: Flips the canonical name record (CNAME) for your DB Instance to point at the healthy replica
    - RTO: 15 seconds
- **Aurora Global databases**
  - Span multiple regions (global)
  - One primary region, one DR region (can be used for lower latency read)
  - < 1 second replica lag on average
  - 📝If not using Global Databases, you can create cross-region Read Replicas
    - 💡 Global databases are recommended: much faster replicas.

## Scalability

- **Vertical Scaling**
  - **Storage Scaling**
    - No need to provision
    - Auto-scales up to 64 TB, in 10GB increments
    - Zero-impact to database performance when scaling.
  - **Compute resources**
    - Can happen during maintainance window
    - Or immediately (a few minutes of downtime)
- **Horizontal Scaling**
  - **Write Scalability**
    - **Multi-Master**: create multiple read-write instances across multi-AZ.
  - **Read Scalability**
    - Aurora can have 15 replicas (+ master)
      - MySQL has 5, an the replication process is faster (sub 10ms replica lag)
    - Support for Cross Region Replication
    - All replicas and master uses a shared storage that's auto expandable
    - Read Replicas can be global
    - Read replicas can have second their (their own) read replicas.
    - 💡 You can use Aurora Replicas as failover targets.
    - Auto-scaling is done through **Auto Scaling policy**
      - You can scale with based on metrics e.g. average CPU utilization of Aurora Replicas
      - For target value e.g. 60% of CPU utilization, specify minimum & maximum replicas and cooldown periods (Seconds between scale-in and out), and enable/disable "Scale in"
- **Shared storage architecture**
  - Makes your data independent from the DB instances in the cluster.
  - You can add a DB instance quickly because Aurora doesn't make a new copy of the table data
  - Storage is striped across 100s volumes
  - You have auto-scaling for all replicas
  - All read replicas connects to **Reader Endpoint** (e.g. `dbname-ro.id.region.amazonaws.com`)
    - Reader endpoint is connection load balancing
    - Load balancing happens at the connection level not the statement level.
      - Anytime client connects to reader endpoint, the client will get connected to the one of the reader endpoint.

## Security

- Encryption at rest using KMS
  - Automated backups, snapshots and replicas are also encrypted
- Encryption in flight using SSL (same process as MySQL or Postgres)
- 📝Can use IAM authentication for Aurora MySQL and Postgres
  - You can also use master username, master password but it's worse.
- Network level: VPC, subnet, public accessibility (can SSH), availability zone (specify where), create new security group or choose existing one.
- ❗ You cannot access the SSH into underlying instances directly by design.
- ❗ You cannot encrypt an existing unencrypted database.
  - Create a new database with encryption enabled and migrate your data instead.

## Aurora Serverless

- No need to choose an instance size -> it auto-scales for you
- Helpful when you can't predict the workload
- DB cluster starts, shutdown and scales automatically based on CPU / connections
- Can migrate from *Aurora Cluster* to *Aurora Serverless* and vice versa
  - Through restoring snapshots
- Aurora Serverless usage is measured in ACU (Aurora Capacity Units)
  - Billed in 5 minutes increment of ACU
- ❗ Some of Aurora features are not supported, check documentation

## Aurora parallel query

- Ability to push down and distribute the computational load of a single query across thousands of CPUs in Aurora’s storage layer
- Good fit for analytical workloads requiring fresh data and good query performance, even on large tables.
- Can be enabled/disabled globally and on session level with `aurora_pq` parameter.
- Causes higher I/O costs as it scans all data.
- ❗ Not available for serverless, Backtrack-enabled instances, and non R-* instances.
- 💡 You can extend your own MySQL databases to Aurora
- You can use Aurora to scale reads for external MySQL databases
- You can use Aurora for DR with external MySQL databases
