# ElastiCache

- ElastiCache is managed Redis or Memcached
- Key-value store
- Caches are in-memory databases with really high performance, sub-millisecond latency
- Leads to faster reads & stateless applications
- Must provision an EC2 instance type e.g. `cache.t2.micro` & number of read replicas.
- **Scaling**
  - Write Scaling using sharding
- **Availability**
  - Multi AZ with Failover Capability
- An alternative is DynamoDb with DAX.
- Monitoring through CloudWatch
- Backup / snapshot / point in time restore features
- Caching patterns
  - *Application* queries *ElastiCache*, if not available, get from RDS and store in *ElastiCache*
    - **Cache hit**: Get data directly from ElastiCache
    - **Cache miss**: Data is not in the DB, application reads from DB and writes to the cache
  - Cache must have an ***invalidation strategy*** to make sure only the most current data is used in there.
    - **Cache invalidation**: whether or not the cache is out of date.
  - Patterns for ElastiCache
    - **Lazy Loading**: all the read data is cached, data can become stale in cache
    - **Write Through**: Adds or update data in the cache when written to a DB (no stale data)
    - **Session Store**: store temporary session data in a cache (using TTL features)
- â— None of the caches support IAM authentication
  - IAM policies are only used for AWS API-level security, such as create a cache, delete a cache etc.
- Managed and Scheduled maintenance with SNS notifications
  - **Subnet group** allows you to specify set of subnets in your VPC for your instances.
- ðŸ’¡ Use case: Key/Value store, Frequent reads, less writes, cache results for DB queries (writethrough pattern), store session data for websites, cannot use SQL.

## Memcached

- In-memory object store
- â— Cache doesn't survive reboots
- Memcached support SASL authentication
- Use cases
  - Quick retrieval of objects from memory
  - Cache often accessed objects

## Redis

- Most popular in-memory key-value store
- Super low latency (sub ms)
- Read Scaling using **Read Replicas**
  - Redis Clustering = Collection of one or more cache nodes
  - One of the nodes is a read/write primary node.
  - All other nodes in the shard are read-only replicas.
- Cache survive reboots by default (persistent)
- ðŸ’¡ Use-cases: User sessions, Leaderboard (for gaming) with ***Redis Sorted Sets***, Distributed states, Relieve pressure on databases (such as RDS), messages with ***Redis Pub/Sub***, recommendation data with ***Redis Hashes***
- Availability: ***Multi-AZ*** with Auto-Failover and enhanced robustness
- Cluster mode -> more persistence and robustness with specified number of read replicas.
  - Sharding through clustering
- **Security**
  - **Network**: Deploy into subnet, set preferred availability zone(s), security group
  - Encryption at rest (KMS) and in-transit (using SSL)
  - Redis support **Redis AUTH** (username / password with `--auth-token` parameter)
- Import data to cluster through seeding RDB file from S3
- Automatic back-up
- Persistence by snapshotting your Redis data using the Backup and Restore feature

## Redis vs Memcached

| | Memcached | Redis |
| -- | ------ | ----- |
| **Persistence** | Not supported | Supported through snapshots |
| **Authentication** | SASL | Redis Auth |
| **Sub-millisecond latency** | Yes | Yes |
| **Clustering** | Each node => Different partition | 1 master and read replicas of it |
| **Unique features** | Multi-threading | Snapshots, replication, transactions, pub/sub, lua scripting, geospatial support |
